---
title: MeTA
layout: default
---

## MeTA is a modern C++ data sciences toolkit featuring

 - text tokenization, including deep semantic features like parse trees
 - inverted and forward indexes with compression and various caching strategies
 - a collection of ranking functions for searching the indexes
 - topic models
 - classification algorithms
 - graph algorithms
 - language models
 - CRF implementation (POS-tagging, shallow parsing)
 - wrappers for liblinear and libsvm (including libsvm dataset parsers)
 - UTF8 support for analysis on various languages
 - multithreaded algorithms

## Setup, tutorials, and documentation

See the [setup guide]({{site.baseurl}}/setup-guide.html) for installation
instructions.

We have walkthrough tutorials for the following parts of MeTA:

 - [System Overview]({{site.baseurl}}/overview-tutorial.html)
 - [Basic Text Analysis]({{site.baseurl}}/profile-tutorial.html)
 - [Analyzers and Filters]({{site.baseurl}}/analyzers-filters-tutorial.html)
 - [Search]({{site.baseurl}}/search-tutorial.html)
 - [Classifiers]({{site.baseurl}}/classify-tutorial.html)
 - [Online Learning]({{site.baseurl}}/online-learning.html)
 - [Part-of-Speech Tagging]({{site.baseurl}}/pos-tagging-tutorial.html)
 - [Parsing]({{site.baseurl}}/parsing-tutorial.html)
 - [Topic Models]({{site.baseurl}}/topic-models-tutorial.html)

Doxygen documentation can be found
[here]({{site.baseurl}}/doxygen/namespaces.html).

## Forum

Visit the [MeTA forum](https://forum.meta-toolkit.org/) to discuss anything
surrounding the toolkit. You will find user support topics, community-written
documentation, and the developer discussions here.

## Motivation

Recent years have seen a dramatic growth of natural language text data,
including web pages, news articles, scientific literature, emails, enterprise
documents, and social media such as blog articles, forum posts, product reviews,
and tweets. This has led to an increasing demand for powerful software tools to
help people manage and analyze vast amount of text data effectively and
efficiently. Unlike data generated by a computer system or sensors, text data
are usually generated directly *by* humans *for* humans.

This has two consequences. *First*, since text data are generated by people,
they are especially valuable for discovering knowledge about human opinions and
preferences, in addition to many other kinds of knowledge that we encode in
text. *Second*, since text is written for consumption by humans, humans play a
critical role in any text data application system, and a text management and
analysis system must involve them in the loop of text analysis.

Existing toolkits supporting text management and analysis tend to fall into two
categories. The first is *search engine toolkits*, which are especially suitable
for building a search engine application, but tend to have limited support for
text analysis/mining functions.  Examples include
[Lucene](https://lucene.apache.org/), [Terrier](http://terrier.org/), and
[Indri/Lemur](http://www.lemurproject.org/). The second is *text mining or
general data mining and machine learning toolkits*, which tend to
selectively support some text analysis functions, but generally do not
support search capability.

However, seamless integration of search engine capabilities with various text
analysis functions is necessary due to two reasons. *First*, while the raw data
may be large for any particular problem, it is often a relatively small subset
of the data that are relevant, and a search engine is an essential tool for
quickly discovering a small subset of relevant text data in a large text
collection. *Second*, search engines are needed to help analysts interpret any
patterns discovered in the data by allowing them to examine the relevant
original text data to make sense of any discovered pattern. A main design
philosophy of MeTA, which also differentiates MeTA from all the existing
toolkits, is its **emphasis on the tight integration of search capabilities**
(indeed, text access capabilities in general) with text analysis functions,
enabling it to provide full support for building a powerful text analysis
application.

Another design philosophy of MeTA is to **facilitate education and research**
experiments with various algorithms. In this direction, it is similar to
Indri/Lemur in its emphasis on modularity and extensibility achieved through
object-oriented design. It enables flexible configuration of a selected subset
of modules so as to make it easy for designing course assignments or
experimenting with a few selected algorithms as needed in focused research
projects. For example, it has been successfully used in a [MOOC on Text
Retrieval and Search Engines](https://class.coursera.org/textretrieval-001)
where over one thousand Coursera learners have used the toolkit to finish a
large programming assignment. It will be used again for supporting programming
assignments for another upcoming [MOOC on Text Mining and
Analytics](https://www.coursera.org/course/textanalytics).

For more discussion about how search and text analysis are related and how to
build a general text analysis engine, please see the [this
presentation](sigir-keynote-zhai.pdf).

## Users

 - The [TIMAN Research Group](http://sifaka.cs.uiuc.edu/ir/) from the [UIUC
   Computer Science Department](http://cs.illinois.edu/) uses MeTA in their text
   mining research
 - The Coursera course [Text Retrieval and Search
   Engines](https://www.coursera.org/course/textretrieval) uses MeTA in
   programming assignments available to thousands of students
 - The Coursera course [Text Mining and
   Analytics](https://www.coursera.org/course/textanalytics) uses MeTA in its
   programming assignments as well
 - An upcoming textbook [Text Data Analysis and Management: A Practical
   Introduction to Text Mining and Information
   Retrieval](https://github.com/smassung/text-data-book-comments) showcases the
   MeTA toolkit with exercises and demos

Contact us through our [GitHub issues
page](https://github.com/meta-toolkit/meta/issues) if you'd like your
application of MeTA on our site!
